Good afternoon.
Another Thursday, seminar Thursday together.
And today we have another alumni,
Gabriel Sude, that was not so long ago
that you were around in the faculty.
Now you are in Google working on the hot topic,
probably today the top hot topic, generative AI.
And talking to machines, hopefully, Gabriela,
you are real, I know you are real.
But with these times, you never know.
So as usual, I don't spend time in presenting our speakers.
I let you to introduce yourself.
We can Google you as well and find more about you.
And thanks again for being here.
And talk to you in about 40 minutes
with the Q&A and the traditional chat.
No worries.
Thanks for the introduction and the invite.
It's a pleasure to be here.
And also like always a pleasure to talk at Unicamp,
whatever, and FAEC as whenever I can.
Curious, like a fun fact, Christian was my,
I think the professor of my last class
that I attended at FAEC.
So yeah, and it was, oh, I don't know.
I'm very glad that, yeah, it was a very good course
on network systems and network labs.
Yeah, so the title of this talk that I wanna talk today
is Talking to Machines,
Practical Introduction to Generative AI.
So as you might know, this is a very hot topic
and I'll try to bring like a balanced
and multidisciplinary overview of the topic.
But yeah, I'll try to save some time for questions
in the end as well.
It's a new content, so you'll be my guinea pigs
and I hope that you enjoy it.
But yeah, it might not be super well-rounded.
A little bit about me, I work at Google DeepMind.
I've been here for slightly over two years now.
Before that I spent five years working at a startup,
logging in Sao Paulo and did an internship at Mozilla.
And as you already know, I studied at Unicamp
couple of years ago, I started 2012,
then I changed to computer engineering in 2013.
So yeah, and for the last two years I've been working on
text generative AI and mostly cogeneration applications.
What I want to talk about today is, I think,
first a more introductionary presentation of generative AI.
So I think how does one train a large sequence model,
a very like one million meters overview,
but how does a modern chatbot works?
And this first part will be more technical and more basic.
So this is content that you can probably find elsewhere
online, but I will try to squeeze the most content I can
in 20 minutes.
I think the second part is more abstract.
It's about interpretations, philosophy and discourse of AI.
I think this is one of the particular topics
I'd like to study and research,
not only at my job, but at my free time.
It's more abstract, but hopefully very useful as well.
It's also like a compilation that you won't find
very easily in the internet.
So feel free to ask questions and email me afterwards
if you want to learn more.
And finally, I think the third part is applications.
So it's very hands-on tips and traps to using these models.
I think like it's also basic, very applied,
but also some of the tricks you only learn
when you use these models on a daily basis.
Some assumptions, I will assume some basic knowledge
of classification regression in neural networks.
This is not mandatory, but it will help.
It will be a bit abstract if you don't know this,
but I hope you can get something out of it.
I highly recommend some past interactions
with GPT and Gemini.
If you haven't played with these language models, you should.
I think it's one of the hot topics of our age.
So at least some experience playing with them is useful.
And most topics apply to multimodal agents,
but of course my examples are skewed towards code and text.
These are my areas of expertise.
So, okay, let's dive in.
What's generative AI?
The name generative AI is already telling
every time someone talks about you.
When they say generative AI,
they are probably differentiating this type of AI
from another type of AI.
So I think a negative definition is very, very useful.
Why is it generative?
It's not classification, it is not regression,
and it's not like multitask,
like multiple choice action selection.
So what it is then, we are usually talking about machines
or systems capable of producing human consumable,
I think these words is important, digital content.
So usually text, videos, images, or audio.
There are more, but I think these are usually the main ones.
So it's generative because it's not predictive.
I think sometimes it is used to differentiate
against artificial general intelligence as well.
So this is not necessarily general,
but it's producing content.
And sometimes used to differentiate against narrow AI.
This term is disputed, but basically the idea is
the outputs are unbounded
and they usually involve digital content.
I think the most obvious examples
are chatbot assistance.
That includes chat GPT, Gemini, Claude,
and some open source alternatives.
And it also includes text to image, text to audio,
audio to audio, all these types of systems.
But I think like the most obvious examples
are these chatbots, this chatbot assistance
and the text to image systems.
And they are often associated with creative tasks.
So it's predictive AI is usually associated
with like predictive statistical tasks
and generative AI is usually associated
with open-ended creative tasks.
I don't love this term.
I'm gonna talk about more later,
but it's something that people talk about.
So how does a modern AI assistant works?
I think this is a very useful use case.
I think it's probably the most interesting
and the hottest one to talk about.
But let's try to understand, I think a little bit
what happens when you go into Gemini
or when you go into chat GPT and you press enter,
like you type something and press enter.
I think one of the key, probably the key component
of these systems is sequence modeling.
And here's, there's a note like not all generative AI
uses sequence model, but most generative AI
includes a sequence modeling component,
even textual image systems that sometimes have another
diffusion or variational auto-encoder component.
It's usually the key, one of the key ideas
is sequence modeling.
And I think understanding sequence modeling
is extremely useful to understand these systems.
And what is a sequence model?
A sequence model is a predictive system
that is capable of predicting
the next element of a sequence.
In text, I think text is probably the easiest
once you understand this phenomena.
You can often think about this as predicting the next word
or predicting the next character.
So in a sequence, when you start with the,
you can try to predict what comes next.
Predicting what comes next after the is really hard.
But if I start adding words and try to predict
what comes after the quick brown is probably fox,
the quick brown fox trumps over the lazy dog.
This is a very common sentence in English.
So I think the main idea behind it is like,
if you have something that is represented by a sequence
and you take a subsequence of that sequence,
can you predict what comes next?
I think this is the key idea of sequence model.
Another interesting example is like,
if you go to mathematical sequences,
if I gave you zero, one, one, two,
you can maybe try to guess,
maybe you're gonna count with numbers repeated.
So it could be one, one, two, two, three, three, four, four,
but it can also be the Fibonacci sequence.
And in this case, I think if I give you zero, one, one, two,
three, five, it's probably the Fibonacci sequence.
If I gave you eight and 13,
it's very, very likely the Fibonacci sequence.
Also, if I gave you some lyrics,
like if I start with, whoa, we were halfway there,
you probably live sitting to living on a prayer.
Like it's, of course, there are some examples
that can probably not do the same thing,
but maybe you're halfway there, something else,
but the wall is quite telling.
So I think this is the key idea behind the sequence model.
Can I predict what comes next in a sequence
given just what I've seen so far?
So this is the key idea, no mathematics so far,
but you can ask like, how do you do this?
And for those familiar with the answer,
like for those familiar with the field,
we usually do it with a probabilistic model.
I tend to think that especially for language,
this is not an obvious leap.
Like, and I think it's probably one of the most powerful
ideas of information theory
and information transmitting in general.
Like, I think Shannon made this leap of faith
that if you can wrap sentences out of their meaning
and just model them as probabilities,
you can actually do some like quite powerful things.
Like, and basically the key idea behind this
is that you can express the probability
of the next element in a sequence.
For example, the probability of folks
given the quick brown as you can express the probability
of the next word and you can probably maximize
probability of folks given the quick brown
and you can maximize probability of 13
given the beginning of the sequence.
You can also measure like probabilities,
probably the probabilities of bananas
given the experiment suggests is very unlikely.
But I think this idea of expressing a sequence,
the next element of a sequence as a probability
over all possible elements in my vocabulary
and given the conditionals of the previous elements
of the sequence, a very, very powerful idea.
And I think like it's a direct result
from Shannon's theory of communication.
So this is quite important.
We're gonna go back to this sometime soon.
And just a reminder, like outputs are probability
distributions over the symbols.
And if you want to model things in the world,
like if you have a bunch of sequences
that you want to model,
you probably want these distributions to reflect
the natural distributions of these words in the world.
So if you start with the word de
and you try to predict what comes next,
this is usually a very wide distributions.
There are plenty of words that can come out of after de.
But if you start with a very targeted sequence,
like the word war two ended in the year
and you try to predict the word that comes next,
this is a very narrow distribution.
Like I think it's very unlikely
that someone is gonna say 2024 there.
Like it's probably 1945.
So when you're trying to optimize for these distributions,
your objective needs to account for that.
Like you have sequences that are very easy to predict
and you have sequences that have very broad distributions.
One way to represent this and to formulate this problem,
I won't dive into detail here,
but it's a direct result of information theory as well.
You can optimize for the cross entropy
between the distribution that you're measuring
and the distribution of the underlying model.
This is a detail,
but if you take a machine learning course,
like you will see this result being brought to you.
Being brought quite frequently.
Okay, so we can predict the words given what comes before.
And you can maybe try to go and build a big table
of all the words in the internet and say like,
I want to predict what comes next.
Like if you try to do that with a big table,
like all the words that come before
and the word that comes next.
It's possible, this is not impossible,
but the number of entries in your table
depends on the number of permutations of symbols.
Not all symbols occur in nature,
like language has structure.
But if you try to build that big table,
this is not practical for sequences over 10 symbols,
basically because this grows with a factorial
of the number of symbols.
So the big table works up to three, four symbols,
but this is a tech that is used
and it's available on phones,
for example, for text completion.
This is changing,
some phones are using deep learning technologies now,
but up to sometime in the past,
every time you got suggestions when typing on your phone,
this was usually the tech that you were using.
You had this big table of three or four symbols
that come before the one that you're typing right now,
and you have a table of occurrences
of what's the most likely next symbol.
So we skipped your neural networks.
And again, I won't be able to teach
neural networks in a slide,
but neural networks are usually
an approximation of this table
using dense vectors.
And I think the word neural network
has very little resemblance with how the brain works,
but they have been historically being called neural networks.
And, but it's basically a very smart projection
of these sequences of words in a dense vectorial space.
And if you can approximate symbols to a vector,
combine symbols of vectors
to a sequence vector efficiently,
and create a predictor from the vector of symbols
to the next symbol,
then you can model much longer sequences.
And this idea has been around for quite some time,
I think like at least 45 years,
but there has been like huge qualitative leaps
in the last few years.
So this is not a new idea.
You can take a sequence, map to a dense vector,
and try to predict the next element in the sequence,
given this dense vector,
but has recently been transformed.
So this is a plot of like time versus number of parameters,
going back to this,
like usually this projection is represented
by a matrix multiplication.
And the number of elements in this matrix multiplications
is usually called like the weights
or the parameters of a neural network.
And if you take like this number of elements
used to do the projection and time,
it's almost an exponential like up to 2022.
There are questions,
whether this exponential is holding or not.
A lot, lots of like tech companies are not disclosing
the sizes of their models anymore,
but it's been almost like a clear exponential
in the last few years.
So this projections are becoming more powerful
and powerful, the number of the length of the sequences
and the accuracy of the representation of the sequences
has been improving.
And I think one of the key components,
again, I won't dive into too many details here,
is to a new, not new anymore,
five year old, five, six year old, no,
architecture in like neural networks called the transformer.
This is the T in GPT.
And I think the key idea of a transformer
is that you can format sequences
and train loads of them at a single inference step.
So it's a technological leap.
It's like a, I think it's like going from like
steam engines to combustion engines.
But like, if you take this,
this architecture is much, much more efficient to train
and to model these sequences.
So you can actually grow the number of parameters.
Again, for those unfamiliar with this topic,
this may be a little bit abstract,
but remember we're taking input sequences
and predicting the next word.
And we do this through a projection
to dense representation.
And this projection is done by matrix multiplications
with very, very large tables.
So this is a hard concept to grasp,
but at least I find it hard.
But this is how text neural network works.
So, but then there's a question,
like what this is actually doing
is a very fancy autocomplete.
Like it's a very, very fancy way
of predicting the next word.
How do you go from that to an assistant?
And you don't have to understand the underlying techniques
from the fancy autocomplete to understand these next parts.
So if I wasn't clear so far,
maybe reset that content and try to understand this part.
So how does an AI system works?
You have this very fancy autocomplete
that the sequence model that does auto-regressive decoding,
but this is only a part of the system.
There is something that I like to highlight
that is formatting.
So when you press enter on a chat bot,
formatting is the first step.
So what is formatting doing?
So formatting then tokenization.
Tokenization is basically a conversion to individual words.
Currently they are not always words.
Sometimes they are pieces of words,
but formatting I think is the first step
and one that is really important to understand
if you wanna work with applications.
So formatting is this process that takes conversation
and transforms it into a completion, autocompletion problem.
And how it usually works is that you have
very specific format to represent conversations
on these models.
And they can often look like this.
You have a preamble that you call a system instruction
where you start, you're a very helpful AI assistant
that is designed to help people or humans
on their daily tasks.
Your name is Bob, right?
And then you can add some examples to this conversation.
You can have the user say, hey, what's your name?
Then you have the agent say, hi, I'm Bob,
I'm your helpful assistant.
And then you can input the question
that someone is asking.
So how do you work?
So if I ask the question, how do you work
through a chat bot that is only doing formatting?
Sometimes you can assume that there is this preamble
that looks like a conversation,
but that's hidden away from the user.
So this was how we designed chat bots
up to a certain point in the past.
You would basically create this preamble
that looks like a conversation,
but you always add a new line to this conversation
in the end of the text.
And that is creating this notion of conversational system.
But in practice, this is just a completion system,
but it's a completion system that was tricked to believe
it is in a conversation already,
and you're just asking another question.
So this is a very key idea
of how do you turn a completion system
into a conversational AI?
And this happens to a certain degree
on all the modern AI systems.
Formatting differs a lot, I think, between agent to agent.
I think this particular formatting is the one that Gemma,
the open source Google models use,
but it's a real example.
Like you can go to Gemma and type this,
put this format and it will work.
Then I think there is something that you also do
on top of these models that is called instruction tuning.
So it's how you update this.
So after you train on the internet,
so you have that sequence model
that was trained on all the sequences that you could use.
So usually all the public web.
You can also go there and in the end of your process,
like update the sequences to follow a certain pattern.
And these certain patterns are usually chosen
and very curated.
And you can do this to enforce some responses.
You can do this to better adhere to the format
that you use during inference when you use the system.
You can also use it to tune tone and form.
But so what does this can look like?
I think if you're building a general assistant,
you don't wanna get into trouble
by endorsing one candidate or the other candidate
in a political setting.
So you can train the model to never answer to a question
like who is the best candidate?
You can train the model to don't reply things
that it doesn't know.
You can train the model to have a name
and this is now can be removed from this preamble
and put into the weights
via this process called instruction tuning.
These are usually like done after the fact,
but it's important to keep in mind that all chatbots,
they have these process.
I think all the major ones at least.
And I like to think of these as editorial decisions,
like it's the same as the newspaper,
like the editor takes a look at what goes in the end
and chooses how the agent should reply.
But all chatbots have editorial decisions,
either implicit or explicit.
This process is like,
I won't dive into the underlying techniques,
but there are methods that get increasingly complex.
You can do supervised fine tuning.
This is a method that looks a lot like modeling the web,
but you can also do reinforcement learning.
And anyways, this is just a footnote.
But there are very important unanswered questions
by this description of AI.
Like how does fancy autocomplete
get so good at random stuff?
Like, and for those who use these chatbots,
you've probably seen,
it doesn't feel like how to fancy autocomplete.
Like it feels like something else.
And this is a question
that I think this descriptive analysis doesn't answer.
Like it's, we actually don't know.
And I think we need more theory around this
to answer this question.
And why, even though it's really good at some stuff,
sometimes it makes like stupid mistakes.
Like you probably seen one or two examples in the web.
Like if you follow the media,
sometimes you will see chatbots making mistakes.
These are sometimes hallucinations,
but we also don't have a good theory
for why that happens sometimes.
But I think the main question is like,
why do they feel so good?
Like, and why do they actually are very good
at some of these tasks?
So then I get to my second part.
Interpretation philosophy and discourse.
So why talk about philosophy of AI?
I think the mainstream discourse is often very ideological.
And no matter what source do you follow,
like I think it is ideological.
And this is not a bad thing.
Everyone subscribes to an ideology.
The risk is not being aware of the ideologies
that are being communicated.
And I think often things presented as pure fact
are often under heavy dispute.
And I think especially if you're not like in the field,
it can be very hard to identify those.
But yeah, I think AI is permeated
by several ideological assumptions
that can actually getting the way of using them correctly.
I think this is probably the most important
if you're trying to apply AI.
These ideological assumptions can make mistakes.
And so try to be careful
and at least be aware of those when you're using them.
So there are five open questions
that I want to talk a little bit about today.
But there are no obvious answers.
There is no right answer to these.
Like again, these are philosophical discussions,
but it's good to be aware of them
and to identify them in discourse when you see it.
I think the first one is emergentism.
Emergentism is this philosophical belief
that phenomena cannot be explained by the sum of its parts.
So it's usually used to describe consciousness, economy,
consciousness, how it arrives from like matter,
from brain matter.
And sometimes people use it in economy,
like transactions, individual transactions
make economy arise,
but it's hard to describe economy
by individual transactions.
You can also think like a river has molecules flowing,
but it's not an accurate description of a river.
Or it's very hard to just reduce it to that.
So emergentism shows a lot on AI discourse.
I just used to describe it,
but it's a philosophical belief and it's not clear.
So yeah, it's been showing a lot on AI discourse
for some time now.
There is this notion that if you make the autocomplete
more powerful, there are emergent behaviors
that start to appear.
So if you start to increase your matrix projection
in your autocomplete component,
it becomes like more and more powerful.
But then again, some people argue that this is a mirage.
Like it's just getting better in incremental ways,
but depending on how you measure performance
and what types of metrics are you using,
this seems emergent.
But often there exists a metric
that if you look, it's incremental.
So it's a disputed topic.
I think we don't fully understand why this happens,
but some people argue that it is not a real phenomenon.
But yes, I think it's good to be aware.
Emergentism is used a lot to talk about AI.
The second one is a more technical one,
but is the notion of scaling loss.
So this is a measured phenomena.
So this has science backing it up.
So if you look at,
so this plot is the validation loss.
So the validation, this equation here,
actually the log of it,
but if you look at the validation loss
over the number of parameters or equivalent,
the compute that you spend to train the model,
it almost certainly looks like a power law.
So what's the interpretation of this?
If you double the compute,
usually that fancy autocomplete component
gets twice as better.
This is the interpretation of the scaling empirical law.
Again, it's an empirical law, it's not a nature law.
And we don't fully understand why it happens,
but it's a measured phenomena.
But twice as better than what?
Just twice as better at predicting the next word.
And there's some research showing like,
okay, it gets better at predicting the next word,
but doesn't necessarily get better at things we care about.
So there's this notion of scaling laws do not scale.
I think this is a very interesting paper.
Showing that, okay, you get better at predicting,
you get twice as better at predicting the next word,
but what does this make as impacting the real world?
And there's some research showing that
sometimes it actually gets worse at things you care about,
even though it gets better at predicting the next word.
So the notion of scaling laws over the validation function
is verified empirically,
but the notion that making your model larger and larger,
you always get better, this is under dispute.
And I think like it's important to keep in mind
because sometimes people will say,
if I just have more compute, everything would be solved.
This is not entirely like a consensus.
Third thing, let's talk about the Turing test.
So you've probably heard about the Turing test.
And it's this notion of if a machine can fool a human,
that it's intelligence, like that it looks like a human,
then it's probably intelligent.
Like, and this is not an accurate description
of the Turing test,
but I highly recommend learning about the Turing test
if you don't.
But I assume most of you have heard about the Turing test
at this point.
The Turing test is an interesting thought experiment,
but I think this leads to,
if you subscribe to the Turing test,
if you subscribe to the Turing test,
it leads to a trap called the Turing trap.
This is a term coined by this guy.
But this basically like the Turing test makes us obsessed
about replicating human intelligence.
And sometimes we're not good at recognizing intelligence
that doesn't look human.
A good example of this, I think is like persistence
that predict protein structures.
This is something that humans cannot do,
but AIs are incredibly powerful at it.
And I think like, and it's probably one of,
in my opinion, the biggest transformations
in the biggest opportunities in the AI field,
but it's hard to recognize this as intelligence
because it doesn't look like human intelligence.
So I think the Turing trap invites us to think
what types of intelligence we can identify
that do not look human, but are incredibly powerful
and can help us improve our lives
and live more fulfilling lives.
Finally, I think there is one called anthropomorphizing.
It's the second to last.
Humans tend to apply human-like values
to inanimate or non-human entities.
I think this has been highly documented throughout history.
It doesn't only happens with AIs.
I think like this goes back to myths
since, I don't know, the Prometheus,
or there are even older, like, tellings of this myth.
But every time we anthropomorphize,
we tend to lower our guard and emphasize
with the thing that we are anthropomorphizing.
And anthropomorphizing is not bad per se.
Like, I don't think there is a problem
with anthropomorphizing,
but it can be used as a design choice.
And I think that is where things get a little bit sketchy.
Like, and I think this can be used to deceive
and make AIs look like they are more interesting
and more intelligent than they look.
And I think, like, often it's a design choice
to include them.
So you should always ask yourself,
like, is this AI trying to flirt with me?
Like, I think we've seen this happen before.
We always be doubt when this happens.
Like, always take it with a pinch of salt.
There's also this notification,
like, it's making AI look like Disney characters.
I think that's also a phenomenon that happens.
Yeah.
So be aware of anthropomorphizing.
And I think the final thing that I want to talk about
is the Shannon divide.
I think this is a term that I invented.
But if you go back to the slide on Shannon,
I think, like, by construction,
we removed any notion of meaning from symbols
and we built our whole system around this property.
So by construction, we removed meaning.
So it's hard to reintroduce meaning,
like, when you take the outputs of a system
without a theory, a theory of semantics.
So this doesn't say that these theories
of semantics don't exist, but you need one.
Like, otherwise, there's a flaw in your, like,
epistemic step-by-step reasoning
on how meaning arises.
So I think the practical conclusion here
is be very careful when you apply meaning.
And this is usually showing metaphors
to the outputs of these systems.
So be careful with these metaphors,
like, things like the AI understands,
or the AI reasons, or the AI thinks.
Like, these are very, very powerful
but dangerous metaphors.
And these often are applied to negative metaphors as well,
things like hallucinate, misinterpret, lie.
These are not like, we don't have a theory of meaning
for these AIs.
And I think it's a huge opportunity
to build theories of meaning to these AIs,
but we don't have one that is widely acceptable.
So careful with metaphors,
especially in a technical setup.
Finally, my last part of the talk.
I know I'm a bit late on time,
but I think I will try to leave time for questions.
I'll try to be fast here.
Formatting is an incredibly powerful tool.
I think I mentioned that before,
and I will try to give some examples about this.
So formatting is sometimes called prompt engineering.
I think this term gets a lot of hype,
so I try to be, try to not use it.
But if you do formatting right,
it's an incredibly powerful tool
to take the best out of these powerful,
fancy, autocomplete systems.
There are two things that I wanna talk about.
One is demonstrations, other is strength chain of thought.
And I think there's a third one
that includes a slide for editing.
So editing, how do you take an autocomplete
and you make a model that can edit things
in the middle of a sentence?
There is a trick that you apply to these language models,
where you, with a certain probability,
like you reshuffle sentences,
and you add these special words, like pre, mid, and stuff,
to learn how to predict things in the middle of a sentence.
And if you apply this to a very small percentage
of your data set, you basically get this ability
without damaging all the other code completion capabilities.
And the fun fact is that this is something
that you can use in your applications,
and most people don't know about it.
But if you are in the middle of a document,
you can edit things there just by using this trick.
This also happens, there are other representations
that apply to the same thing.
The second thing I want to talk about
is few-shot prompting.
Sometimes people try to describe a problem to these models,
but remember they are very good autocompletes.
So they're very good at finding the patterns in examples.
So I always suggest try to give 50 demonstrations.
It's usually much better than explaining your problem.
And I highly recommend trying few-shot prompting.
There's also the opportunity to do instruction tuning.
It's an effective, but more expensive tools.
So I always recommend people to try few-shot prompting first
and then try instruction tuning if that works.
And usually you can do it via cloud APIs.
You don't have to build instruction tuning yourself.
And finally, I think this is another tip,
very engineering one.
Don't roll your, don't train your own base models.
Like it's an incredibly hard and expensive endeavor.
Like the same way you don't rewrite Linux,
you don't build your own file system
and you don't write your own database.
Don't try to build your own autocomplete.
Try to leverage the ones that exist in the market
off the shelf or maybe with some fine tuning.
And unless you're doing this for research,
like avoid building your own language models,
use one from cloud.
You're usually better off this way
if you're trying to apply them.
Finally, be aware of bias.
The internet is not a neutral place.
So representation in these models,
predicting the next word can contain bias.
My main takeaway here is lots of these issues
can be fixed and mitigated by these editorial decisions
in the chat bot, but don't delegate decisions
where accountability is important.
We don't know how to fully mitigate those yet.
Try to apply mitigations whenever you can.
I think that's it.
I think it's an incredible moment to be in this field,
but also a very loud one.
So try to listen, think and plan before you launch.
Hope these tips are useful
as if you ever decide to apply AI.
I will open to the questions.
I have some ideas here besides my content, if you want.
Thanks.
Thanks, Gabriella.
Well, lots of interesting stuff.
I love your animations and the pictures
that help also in getting the message.
And they're very interesting topics or thoughts.
You mentioned, so I was browsing here
through the questions of the students.
As you know, one of their activity
previous to each seminar is a little bit of homework,
trying to identify which are the five most
top relevant literature, even at the seminar abstract.
I will share it with you later.
But I was browsing through their questions
and most of them, they touch your last topic on ethics,
AI, all these ethic related considerations.
Are you aware about techniques or efforts
that could overcome this very relevant issue
around the multiple dimensions behind ethics,
racism, sexism, and can you share some examples
shed some light so that these biases can be overcome
in the future or there is no hope or what are your thoughts?
Yeah, sure.
I think this, I wish I had more time to cover this
but I also wanted to talk about this
broader philosophical things.
But on bias, I think one important thing is like
these systems, they are practically reproducing
probabilities we've seen in the internet.
And these true statements are very important.
I think the internet is not a neutral place
and it's not an accurate representation of society.
So sometimes people associate like all the probabilities
that are in the internet should be reflected in the world.
I think that's a very heavy statement
because like not everyone is in the internet
and not everyone has been in the internet for the same time.
So, but I strongly believe this is the best we can get
as a picture of this society.
What I think is there is a lot of like,
at least a written one, if you can,
even if you introduce books and everything like that,
it's very hard to go beyond that.
What I think there are solutions is
lots of these issues can be mitigated
during that instruction tuning process.
And there are some really interesting ways of like,
for example, mitigating gender bias during that step.
Like you can basically make sure your priors
for male doctor and female doctor are well represented
when you do translation from English to Portuguese,
for example, where gender shows in words, like doctor.
So there's techniques that can be applied there
and they should be applied.
And so there's lots of interesting
research opportunities there.
Measuring these effects, I think it's incredibly important.
So you should be always taking this into account
when you launch a system.
You should try to actually measure these.
And I think the best way to accurately measure
and know that if you're making,
that you should probably postpone your product launch
is to have like a diverse pool of people
testing your system.
Like if you don't have those,
it's much harder to detect those.
But I believe there is opportunities in research
to do like more, to include fairness in your,
and reduce bias in your responses in this,
like especially in this post-training
instruction tuning step.
Right, I like this statement that don't,
or this recommendation, don't delegate decisions
where there is accountability behind them.
That's a very good one.
Let me jump now over the YouTube channel to the chat.
There is a technical question that I really don't know.
What are these vanilla auto-encoders?
Ariel asked, do you consider vanilla auto-encoders
as generative AIs since I can explore the latent space?
I don't know what's latent space
and not this vanilla auto-encoder.
Yeah.
Maybe you can say something.
Yeah, yeah.
I think like not a specialist in the field also,
but like vanilla auto-encoders,
I think are these models where you try to recreate content
with a network via bottleneck.
So you have like very small number of parameters
at some point in your network
that basically give you the chance to do,
to tweak these parameters to do generation.
I consider them generative
because I think there is a more technical
definition of generative AI that I didn't use in my slides
that is basically like something where the output space
can be bigger than the input space.
So it can be considered, I think, generative AI technology,
but I think it's more borderline.
I don't think everyone agrees with this, but yeah.
I would say yes, personally.
Okay, good.
I don't know if you would like to comment on this one,
but that popped up, I was browsing here,
number of students, they probably saw the release of GPT-4.0
and they want your opinion.
And also what is next or would you like to comment
if you want to skip about GPT-4.0?
That's also fine, or if, and if not then.
I mean, yeah, I can comment, I think, on a high level.
Like I don't, I think it's a very,
the field is very, very active
and there's lots of things going out by all the players.
Sometimes I think there's a risk
of over-indexing to one particular release.
Everyone is releasing periodically.
I think it's, when you look, when you zoom out a bit,
you can see incremental steps in each one of these models.
I think this release in particular, I think,
like this week there has been like two important releases.
I think the one from OpenAI
and also the one during Google I.O.
I think these are both like interesting releases.
What I like about them the most
is that I think there is like this huge push
for smaller models
that I think are potentially useful in some ways.
But I won't comment on details about the model
because I think it gets into complicated territory.
Yeah, it's fine.
But I had to do my work as well here by proposing
through the questions,
which I will share with you as well.
About these smaller scales, LLMs,
is there some space for also like small scale applications
in embedded devices, in cell phones
that they don't have so much compute,
but for some specialized,
very much specialized tasks would be useful?
That's one, another question that popped up
or we need to rely on very large scale computing facilities.
That's an interesting question.
And I think that touches a topic
that is very close to my heart.
I didn't talk about this today,
but like I mostly work on code generation.
I think that's one of my favorite topics.
And I think it's one of, in my point of view,
one of the most successful and useful applications of AI.
And I think lots of the recent models are embedded models
that you can run on your computer with reasonable latency.
So I think there's tons of opportunities for these,
not so narrow, but narrower applications
that are not like chatbots.
And they're highly crafted to one particular use case.
I think code completion is a very successful story.
Yeah, so I personally believe in that direction a lot.
And that's not to say that they're less powerful.
Like don't get me wrong.
If you take a model that works on a smartphone now,
it's probably better than like, it's not probably,
it's definitely better than the best model
from two years ago.
So they're quite powerful,
but I highly believe this application
of like more targeted on-device use cases.
And I also like the idea of use cases
that do one thing by one thing really, really well.
This gets into products, but I-
Like specialized data and for a certain domain
for a certain task.
Yes.
A lot of sense, right?
Because like there's this statement,
if you want to do everything,
or you think you do everything well,
you don't do nothing well or at all, right?
That's interesting.
As you know, we in the electrical and computing engineering,
we also look at hardware a lot.
There were a few questions here, hardware related.
So today, most of the computing
are exploding GPUs, right?
FPGAs, there is also in the AI domain in the TensorFlow,
they has a specific deep TensorFlow processing unit.
Do you see also hardware or are you aware about hardware
that is going to be designed for a specific LLM type
of your generative AI applications to accelerate it?
Maybe it's already happening and I don't know.
I think it's definitely happening.
Like I think the latest generation of TPUs and GPUs
are mostly designed for AI.
And I think they are extremely like generatively.
And they are extremely like over-fitted to this problem.
Like I think there are huge opportunities there.
Like I think if you, again, something that is up for debate,
but if you think AI is a revolution, similar,
you and this is the fuel of this revolution, right?
And usually if you look back to like industrial revolutions
in the past, like you need fuel to,
so you need energy and you need like,
maybe it's not the fuel, but it's the iron.
Like I think we have to think about the best comparison here.
But so lots of companies that focus on hardware
are extremely well-valued.
And I think like there's tons of research opportunities
on doing better hardware for large language models
and generative AI technologies.
If you work on this field, I'm very happy for you.
There are loads of career opportunities for you.
Good.
Last question, the same that we had,
we are already over 2 p.m. Brazil time.
So what would you recommend to our students
rather than undergrad if they want to succeed
and be employed like you in Google DeepMind?
What is the key there?
What would be your message?
If you were talking to these undergrads and grads.
Be curious, I think don't be afraid
at applying to these hard positions.
Try to learn a niche very well that,
like own the things that are hot.
Try to find a niche that you do very, very well.
And the other people don't know much about it.
And yeah, be curious overall.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's my main advice, I would say.
And don't be afraid to apply into these positions.
Like it's hard to get in at Google, but not that hard.
And it's a pretty interesting company to work with.
Great, I loved it.
So thank you again.
And if you step by, of course,
come over to the faculty and say hello.
Keep the good work and hope looking forward
for the upcoming releases over there.
Was a pleasure to be here.
Thank you so much.
Bye.
Thank you.
See you all next Thursday with the next talk.
Thank you.
Pronto.
